Your attention may be your most precious resource and you only have so much of it to spread around each day.
Work and social obligations demand a portion of it.
And its easy to occupy whatever is left over with stimuli of one kind or another whether its listening to a podcast or watching a show.
For many people time spent in the shower or trying to fall asleep at night may be the only remaining scraps of the day when their mind is wholly free to wander.
None of this may seem like a problem.
After all why waste time doing nothing when you could be doing something fun or productive?
As long as youre occupying your mind with (mostly) high quality content whats the harm?
The research on learning is extremely clear says Loren Frank a professor at the Center for Integrative Neuroscience at the University of California San Francisco.
To learn something well you need to study it for a while and then take a break.
Frank points to the evidence on educational training which has shown again and again that people retain new information best when their minds are given time off to encode and consolidate.
Even outside of study contexts taking small breaks after digesting new material whether its a news article or an important email appears to help your brain parse and memorize what youve just learned.
To better understand how brains process new information Frank has conducted brain scan experiments on rats.
He and his colleagues have shown that when rats are allowed to rest after completing an unfamiliar maze their brains appear to automatically replay the experience of navigating the maze.
Confronted later with the same labyrinth the rats find their way through it more quickly.
We know the brain can get into its downtime state very quickly and the education research suggests just a few minutes  five to 15  are enough to aid learning.
On the other hand when rats are immediately confronted with a new challenge after completing a maze their brains dont have the chance to replay what theyve learned Frank says.
Later when challenged again with the same maze these rats arent able to navigate it any faster than they did the first time.
Frank says the human brain seems to work in a similar way.
The brain needs free time to process new information and turn it into something more permanent he says.
How much free time? That depends.
We know the brain can get into its downtime state very quickly and the education research suggests just a few minutes five to 15  are enough to aid learning he says.
The amount of time a mind needs to construct a durable memory probably varies from one person to the next and also depends on the complexity of what that person is trying to learn he adds.
Experts say idle time likely also helps develop mental processes that are far more complicated than memory storage and retrieval.
The deeper reflective states where you make meaning of whats going on and connect it to self and identity and integrate knowledge together into coherent narratives.
These kinds of processes only happen when youre not focused on some inthemoment activity says Mary Helen ImmordinoYang a professor of education psychology and neuroscience at the University of Southern California.
When your brain is bombarded with novel stimuli or information she says it can struggle to generate purposefulness and meaning.
Too much of this can you leave you feeling aimless  or worse.
If youre stuck in this feedme stimulation loop we know that this is associated with the feeling of being out of control she says.
Its associated with anxiety and disconnectedness and a feeling of whats really real?
Mental idle time meanwhile seems to facilitate creativity and problemsolving.
Our research has found that mindwandering may foster a particular kind of productivity says Jonathan Schooler a professor of psychological and brain sciences at the University of California Santa Barbara who has studied mindwandering extensively.
He says overcoming impasses including what he calls aha! moments  often happen when peoples minds are free to roam.
I think we need to recognize that the brains internal train of thought can be of value in itself.
Schooler mentions the common experience of not being able to recall a word thats on the tip of your tongue  no matter how hard you try to think of it.
But as soon as you move onto another mental task the word pops into your head.
I think its very possible that some unconscious processes are going on during mindwandering and the insights these processes produce then bubble up to the surface he says.
Its also possible that depriving the brain of free time stifles its ability to complete this unconscious work.
I think we need to recognize that the brains internal train of thought can be of value in itself Schooler says.
In the same way we can experience a sleep deficit I think we can experience a mindwandering deficit.
Many people find it difficult or stressful to do absolutely nothing he adds.
Instead Schooler says nondemanding tasks that dont require much mental engagement seem to be best at fostering productive mindwandering.
He mentions activities like going for a walk in a quiet place doing the dishes or folding laundry chores that may occupy your hands or body but that dont require much from your brain.
While a wandering mind can slip into some unhelpful and unhealthy states of rumination that doesnt mean blocking these thoughts with constant distraction is the way to go.
I think its about finding balance between being occupied and in the present and letting your mind wander about thinking positive thoughts and thinking about obstacles that may stand in your way says Schooler.
There may be no optimal amount of time you can commit to mental freedom to strike that balance.
But if you feel like it takes remarkable effort for you to disengage from all your favorite sources of mental stimulation thats probably a good sign you need to give your brain more free time ImmordinoYang says.
To just sit and think is not pleasant when your brain is trained out of practicing that but thats really important for wellbeing she adds.
Frank recommends starting small maybe take a 15minute distractionfree walk in the middle of your day. You might find your world changes he says.
